Add documentation of OpenTelemetry setup with the collector (#195)
pganalyze/pganalyze-docs: collector/otel-setup/newrelic.mdx

backlink_title: 'OpenTelemetry Setup'
---

You can set up the pganalyze collector OpenTelemetry exporter with New Relic to
capture spans for query EXPLAIN plans inside your traces.
The span contains the link to the EXPLAIN plan in the pganalyze app, so that you
can easily visit the pganalyze page to find out why the query is slow.

New Relic provides OTLP endpoints that you can use to export tracing spans from
the pganalyze collector. In your application side, you can either use the
New Relic agent or OpenTelemetry SDKs.

## Setup steps

1. [Start sending tracing data from your application to New Relic](#start-sending-data-of-your-application-to-new-relic)
2. [Add traceparent query tag to the query](#add-traceparent-query-tag-to-the-query)
3. [Create a New Relic API key](#create-a-new-relic-api-key)
4. [Set up an API key and an endpoint in the pganalyze collector](#setup-an-api-key-and-an-endpoint-in-the-pganalyze-collector)

### Start sending tracing data from your application to New Relic

To start sending tracing data from your application to New Relic, you can either
use the guided install and install the New Relic agent, or use OpenTelemetry

> SDKs. You can read how to setup OpenTelemetry integration in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SDKs. You can read how to set up the OpenTelemetry integration in
```
:smile:

default.

### Add traceparent query tag to the query

When you use OpenTelemetry SDKs to send data to New Relic, you can follow the
[traceparent documentation](/docs/collector/otel-setup/traceparent) to add a
traceparent query tag to the query.

When you are using the New Relic agent, you'll need to modify how to generate a
traceparent value. You can still follow the traceparent documentation for how to
add it as a query tag, then you can generate a traceparent tag as follows.

#### Ruby

```ruby
# make sure NewRelic::Agent::Transaction.tl_current is present
# before generating a traceparent
current_trace = NewRelic::Agent::Transaction.tl_current

format(
  '00-%<trace_id>s-%<parent_id>s-%<trace_flags>.2d',
  trace_id: current_trace.trace_id.rjust(32, '0').downcase,
  parent_id: current_trace.current_segment.guid,
  trace_flags: current_trace.sampled? ? '01' : '00'
)
```

#### Python

```python
import newrelic.agent

dummy_headers = []
newrelic.agent.insert_distributed_trace_headers(dummy_headers)
traceparent = None

for key, value in dummy_headers:
    if key == 'traceparent':
        traceparent = value
        break

> # only add traceparent as a query tag when it's not None

Author: I've been looking into this, and trying to find out how to do it but actually it doesn't look like super straight forward (docs are not so great, sadly).

Looks like Python provides some auto instruments which auto-detect what packages the app has and enable proper instrumentations. I managed to set up with Flask + Postgres, though to enable, I had to do the following and I'm not so sure if that's the "correct way" to do it:

```
 Psycopg2Instrumentor().uninstrument()
 Psycopg2Instrumentor().instrument(enable_commenter=True, commenter_options={})
 ```

The good news is, OpenTelemetry Python supports emitting the sql comment pretty well like above, you can pass the arg to the instrumentor and the comment will be there. Sad news is, this forces users to use the manual instrument I think. I _think_ I was able to use the hybrid but my flask app is just so tiny and not sure if the hybrid (of auto instruments + some manual) is possible. I also found this GH issue which will make our life much easier, as we only need to ask customers to turn on this ENV var: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/3560

I'm also having problem setting up this with Django :/ I made a super vanilla app and yet it's not working (getting the same error as this person: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/77346904/django-python-you-must-set-settings-allowed-hosts-if-debug-is-false).

tl;dr -- I think I can write something based on above. At least mentioning something like "if you enable comments with instrumentor (you can also specify at framework level too), traceparent will be there automagically", without going into too much detail.
Thoughts?

> # only add traceparent as a query tag when it's not None

Reviewer 2: > At least mentioning something like "if you enable comments with instrumentor (you can also specify at framework level too), traceparent will be there automagically", without going into too much detail.

Yeah, I think that's a good starting point - we can revise it based on customer feedback as needed.

> # only add traceparent as a query tag when it's not None

Author: Ok I updated. I think I started to understand what's going on but I'm not quite sure.
I wrote "you need to use manual instrumentation" but I think it's not entirely true and you could still do the automatic instruments, then just do uninstrument/instrument the specific instrumentor like I demonstrated above. That's said, I'm really not confident on that so I'll go with "you need to use manual instrumentation" for now. Hope the reader who already has OpenTelemetry instrumentation enabled on their application... knows more things than me 🙈

```

For Go, it is best to use the OpenTelemetry SDK as it will integrate well with
sqlcommenter and the traceparent query tag will be added without any extra
setup.

### Create a New Relic API key

You can create a new API key with a ["License" key type](https://docs.newrelic.com/docs/apis/intro-apis/new-relic-api-keys/).
You can optionally use the same key as the one used by your application.

> ### Setup an API key and an endpoint in the pganalyze collector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Set up an API key and an endpoint in the pganalyze collector
```

the pganalyze collector. In your application side, you can either use the
New Relic agent or OpenTelemetry SDKs.

## Setup steps

1. [Start sending data of your application to New Relic](#start-sending-data-of-your-application-to-new-relic)
2. [Add traceparent query tag to the query](#add-traceparent-query-tag-to-the-query)
3. [Create a New Relic API key](#create-a-new-relic-api-key)
4. [Setup an API key and an endpoint in the pganalyze collector](#setup-an-api-key-and-an-endpoint-in-the-pganalyze-collector)

### Start sending data of your application to New Relic

To start sending data of your application to New Relic, you can either use the
guided install and install the New Relic agent, or use OpenTelemetry SDKs.
You can read how to setup OpenTelemetry integration in [their documentation](https://docs.newrelic.com/docs/more-integrations/open-source-telemetry-integrations/opentelemetry/get-started/opentelemetry-set-up-your-app/).

Using New Relic agents If you choose to use the New Relic agent, make sure to use the version that
supports [Distributed Tracing](https://docs.newrelic.com/docs/distributed-tracing/concepts/introduction-distributed-tracing/).

> Latest version of agents in each language support it and also it's enabled by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The latest versions of agents in each language support it and it's enabled by
```
Since there's multiple agents, there's multiple versions.

default.

### Add traceparent query tag to the query

When you use OpenTelemetry SDKs to send data to New Relic, you can follow the
[traceparent documentation](/docs/collector/otel-setup/traceparent) to add a
traceparent query tag to the query.

When you are using the New Relic agent, you'll need to modify how to generate a
traceparent value. You can still follow the traceparent documentation for how to

> add it as a query tag, then you can generate a traceparent tag like the
> following ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
add it as a query tag, then you can generate a traceparent tag as follows.
```

#### Ruby

```ruby
# make sure NewRelic::Agent::Transaction.tl_current is present
# before generating a traceparent
current_trace = NewRelic::Agent::Transaction.tl_current

format(
  '00-%<trace_id>s-%<parent_id>s-%<trace_flags>.2d',
  trace_id: current_trace.trace_id.rjust(32, '0').downcase,
  parent_id: current_trace.current_segment.guid,
  trace_flags: current_trace.sampled? ? '01' : '00'
)
```

#### Python

```python
import newrelic.agent

dummy_headers = []
newrelic.agent.insert_distributed_trace_headers(dummy_headers)
traceparent = None

for key, value in dummy_headers:
    if key == 'traceparent':
        traceparent = value
        break

# only add traceparent as a query tag when it's not None
```

> For Go, it is the best to use the OpenTelemetry SDK as it will integrate well

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Go, it is best to use the OpenTelemetry SDK as it will integrate well
```

with sqlcommenter and the traceparent query tag will be added without any extra

> setups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
setup.
```
